---
layout: post
title: An Update
---

I made a post more than a year ago describing some [difficulties I had](../../../2018/10/01/burnout.html) at that time in my life.

In some sense I do regret making such a private dialogue with myself public. 
But I am continually surprised and enlightened by the conversations around burnout and work-life balance the post has sparked.
I suppose what felt like an impulse at the time actually turned out to contain some amount of externally-observable truths.
I wanted to give an update and perhaps not get so personal in the interest of professionalism.

Things are mostly going better. 
I have made more progress over the last year than I can imagine.
Of course, I am still stressed, and it is not like I have no concerns about my future.
I still have problems with over-committing and not prioritizing the right things.

But these failures do not define my worth as a person. Nothing about my work does.

I have learned to have dreams, and yet not feel crushed when I see certain doors close.
I think these skills are good to keep in mind, especially during a time like graduate school admissions season,
when I've had to assess the progress I made in the past four years.
In some places I am satisfied, and others I am not. So it goes.

In parallel with furthering my academic career I have made it a priority to stay healthy, mentally and physically.
Nothing is worth compromising these things.

I do wish it was easier to discuss stress, aspirations, and burnout with others. 
Berkeley has some sort of "depression culture", where depressive behaviors are normalized.
This can be a positive thing in reducing mental health stigma, but these are also emotionally heavy things to deal with,
and it is not reasonable to expect others to constantly acknowledge them.

I am still navigating the space between staying authentic to my personal experience, but keeping the right things private and public in the right circles.
