---
layout: post
title: "Math 249 Lecture 1: What is Enumerative Combinatorics?"
date: 2018-08-22
class: math249
---

> The following is my best attempt at capturing the lecture, it sort of breaks down with time. I would highly recommend reading Enumerative Combinatorics, Chapter 1 for a likely clearer explanation.

- Vera Serganova is currently touring the world, so colleagues will lecture for her for a few lectures.
Lecture today is given by Alexander Givental, Mariusz Wodzicki will give Friday lecture, someone Monday lecture,
and Professor Serganova will be back on Wednesday.
- The textbook is Enumerative Combinatorics by Richard Stanley. We are unsure which of the volumes, definitely the first.

Enumerative combinatorics is about counting the elements in a finite set.
Generating functions are important in enumerative combinatorics.

### Binomial Coefficients

$\binom{n}{k}$ represents the number of $k$-element subsets in $[n] = \{1, \ldots, n\}$.

We can explore this from a generating function perspective. We have:

$$\sum_{k=0}^n \binom{n}{k} x^k = (1+x) \ldots (1+x)$$

We can approach this formula from a combinatorial proof perspective. On the right hand side, we multiply $(1+x)$ with itself $n$ times. For the left hand side, the coefficient in front of each power of $x^k$ counts how many times $x^k$ shows up if we expand the right hand side. Making one of the $x^k$ amounts to "choosing" $x$ from $k$ factors in the right hand side, and "choosing" $1$ the remaining $n-k$ times. There are $\binom{n}{k}$ ways to do this, because this is choosing the $k$ factors to "pull" an $x$ from.

There is also a recursive nature here, with the formula $(1+x)^n = (1+x)(1+x)^{n-1}$ related to the formula
$\binom{n}{k} = \binom{n-1}{k} + \binom{n-1}{k-1}$.

### Multisets

Consider objects of the form $x_1^{a_1} x_2^{a_2} \ldots x_n^{a_n}$, the multinomials in $x_1,\ldots x_n$. $k = a_1 + \ldots + a_n$ is the degree of a multinomial. How many multinomials over $x_1, \ldots x_n$ are there of degree $k$?

This is the number of multisets of _cardinality_ $k$ from a set of $n$ objects, $\left(\binom{n}{k}\right)$.

We can derive the closed form formula (I didn't really follow all of this)...

$$ \sum_{a_1, \ldots a_n \geq 0 } x_1^{a_1} \ldots x_n^{a_n} = (1 + x_1 + x_1^2 + \ldots)(1 + x_2 + x_2^2 + \ldots)\ldots(1 + x_n + x_n^n + \ldots)$$
$$ = \frac{1}{(1 - x_1)(1 - x_2)\ldots(1 - x_n)}$$

$$\sum_{k \geq 0} \left( \binom{n}{k} \right) x^k = (1 - x)^{-n} = \sum_{k \geq 0} \binom{-n}{k} (-x)^k$$

$$ \frac{(-1)^k (n)(n + 1) \ldots (n + k - 1)}{k!} = \binom{n+k-1}{k}$$ 

So $\left(\binom{n}{k}\right) = \binom{n+k-1}{k} = \binom{n+k-1}{n-1}$.
Note that $\left(\binom{n}{k}\right) = (-1)^k \binom{-n}{k}$, a demonstration of _reciprocity_. This is not an accident.
In chapter 4 we talk about a general framework for diophantine equations.

What followed was a 10-minute exposition on convex polyhedra? and duality?, which was described as "best guess" for what chapter 4 covers.

### Counting Vector Subspaces

Consider a finite field $\mathbb{F}_q$ (the relevant theory says that $q = p^r$ for some $r > 0$ and prime $p$, but this is unimportant from a combinatorial perspective).

Consider the cardinality of the set of vector subspaces of $\mathbb{F}_q^n$:

$$G(n, k) = |\text{Gr}_{k, n}(\mathbb{F}_q)| = | \{ V^k \colon V^k \subset \mathbb{F}_q^n \} |$$

__Theorem.__ $G(n, k) = \binom{n}{k}_q$

The rest I was unable to follow.

### Schubert cells in Grassmanians

I was unable to follow this piece. There was some discussion of matrices, reduced row echelon form, and the $\mathbb{F}^\Delta$ partition of Grassmanian space.

### Permutations

Let's apply what principles we have developed to permutations.
We say $S_n$ is the set of permutations of $[n]$, or the collection of all bijections on $[n]$.
Typical combinatorial notation for a permutation is to just rearrange the numbers $1, \ldots, n$, i.e.
$(3 \ 1 \ 4 \ 5 \ 2)$.

$S_n$ forms a group under composition, and is generated by the transpositions/swaps
$\tau_{1, 2}, \tau_{2, 3}, \ldots \tau_{n-1, n}$.
A natural question to ask, then, is the "length" of an element of $S_n$, i.e. the shortest number of transpositions
we need to apply to reach that element from the identity permutation which preserves order.

We can count the length of a permutation by counting the number of inversions, i.e. indices
$1 \leq i < j \leq n$ such that $\pi(i) > \pi(j)$. There is a straightforward algorithm to demonstrate that
a sequence of transpositions exists to produce $\pi$ from the identity permutation.
